Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**ECP-2005-CULT-038099**

**ATHENA**

**Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing**

**with translations**

**Deliverable number** *D4.2*

**Dissemination level** *Public*

**Delivery date** *30**th* *July 2010*

**Status** *In progress*

**Author(s)** *Marie-Véronique Leroi (MCC/DREST),*

*Johann Holland (Michael Culture Aisbl)*

***e\*****Content*****plus\***

This project is funded under the eContentplus programme1,

a multiannual Community programme to make digital content in Europe more accessible, usable and exploitable.

1 OJ L 79, 24.3.2005, p. 1.

1/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Table of Contents**

**1.** **EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................................... 3**

**2.** **INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................ 4**

2.1. CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVES 4

2.2. AUDIENCE AND REQUIRED SKILLS 6

2.3. BASIC CONCEPTS 6

**3.** **SKOS AND TERMINOLOGY MAPPING.............................................................................................. 12**

3.1. SKOS 12

3.2. METHODOLOGY FOR MAPPING 18

**4.** **WP4 EXPERIMENT.................................................................................................................................. 20**

4.1. PROCESS AND ISSUES 21

4.2. BENCHMARK RESULTS 24

4.3. MEANS 25

4.4. ATHENA FORMAT 27

4.5. EXPERIMENT RESULTS 31

**5.** **GUIDELINES............................................................................................................................................. 38**

5.1. BENEFITS IN USING SKOS 38

5.2. GUIDELINES FOR SKOSIFICATION 39

5.3. MAPPING 45

**6.** **CONCLUSIONS......................................................................................................................................... 49**

6.1. WHAT WOULD BE AN IDEAL TOOL? 49

6.2. PERSPECTIVE 50

**7.** **ANNEXES................................................................................................................................................... 51**

7.1. ACRONYMS 51

7.2. PROCESS AND ISSUES 51

7.3. BENCHMARK: TOOLS 62

7.4. POOL PARTY SKOS VALIDATOR 7.5. SCHEMATIC VIEW OF THE MICHAEL SUBJECT LIST FOR ARCHITECTURE DOMAIN 7.6. SCHEMATIC VIEW OF THE RMCA THESAURUS FOR ARCHITECTURE DOMAIN 7.7. SCHEMATIC VIEW OF THE PICO THESAURUS FOR ARCHITECTURE DOMAIN 7.8. SCHEMATIC VIEW OF THE ATHENA THESAURUS 66

67

67

68

69

2/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**1.** **Executive summary**

This deliverable is part of ATHENA Workpackage 4 (WP4) and addresses European

museums. It aims to present a set of guidelines for the mapping of terminology resources into

SKOS (SKOSification) dealing with translations (multilingualism). The deliverable is

structured as follows:

• *Executive Summary*: A short summary of the deliverable

• *Introduction*: Explaining the context of the whole work package in which the deliverable

stands, the objectives of the task that the deliverable relates to, the audience for these

guidelines and the skills needed to apply them, and the basic concepts the reader should

have a grasp of in order to have a good understanding of the deliverable content.

• *SKOS and terminology mapping*: Presenting SKOS features, the ATHENA Format, and

methodology for mapping.

• *Experiment within the WP4*: Presenting, in detail, the aims and objectives of this

experiment, and the methodology that was set up for the elaboration of the first core of

the ATHENA Thesaurus.

• *Guidelines*: For European museums in relationship to SKOSification and mapping of

multilingual terminologies.

• *Conclusions and perspectives*: The main results and a proposal of work for the future.

3/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**2.** **Introduction**

**2.1.** **Context and objectives**

**2.1.1.** **WP4 short introduction**

According to the ATHENA *Description of Work* WP4 should explore the current practices in

the field of terminology adopted by European museums, to be compared with those used in

other sectors of cultural heritage and in cross-domain portals, in order to guarantee semantic

interoperability within Europeana. It is working on multilinguality issues by surveying and

integrating existing multilingual tools and ensuring the alignment between the museums’

terminologies and the ATHENA SKOS thesaurus.

**2.1.2.** **Task introduction**

We already have an overview of terminology use in European museums1and have created a

first set of recommendations based on an analysis of this overview2

.

In order to enhance these recommendations we launched an experiment the first phase of

which is now complete. The experiment consists in building from different existing

terminology resources a common thesaurus that is the Athena Thesaurus. This process is

achieved on the basis of specific criteria and allows us to test our recommendations and

guidelines. A summary of the results was presented in a workshop that took place in Paris on

the 25th June 2010. This deliverable presents more in depth all those results. It will be helpful

for the follow-up of the WP4 and will ensure the consistency of the final recommendations for

the SKOSification of the terminology resources in order to allow semantic interoperability

with Europeana. By SKOSification we mean the tranformation of a terminology resource into

SKOS.

Indeed Europeana in its data ingestion process is also gathering the corresponding

terminology resources. In order to provide the semantic data layer to its contents, Europeana

requires these terminology resources to be provided as Linked Open Data (LOD) links or as

SKOSified versions. As mentioned in the White paper from Europeana3, these requirements

will help to propose to the end-users knowledge, e.g. information in context rather than

“simple” data.

1 ATHENA Deliverable D4.1

• PDF version: http://www.athenaeurope.org/getFile.php?id=398

• Wiki: http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/ (section D4.1: resources)

2 http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Recommendations

3 http://version1.europeana.eu/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=cb417911-1ee0-473b-8840-

bd7c6e9c93ae&groupId=10602

4/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**2.1.3.** **Relationship with the work of other ATHENA Work Packages**

***Relationship with LIDO\***

Our work takes into account LIDO as data model for ATHENA. LIDO was developed in

WP3 and in collaboration with WP7. LIDO has been designed in order to take into account

every semantically enriched vocabulary notably SKOS then the interoperability between the

LIDO metadata scheme and the ATHENA format for terminology. WP3 is taking part to the

WP4 working group and can make sure that there is no contradiction between the two models.

LIDO1 stands for Lightweight Information Describing Objects and is the result of a joint

effort between existing initiatives: CDWA Lite, Museumdat2 and SPECTRUM3. The first

point to make about LIDO is that it is a XML harvesting schema. It should not be used as a

basis for a collection management system. It is for delivering metadata for use in the service

environment of an organisation’s online collections database, portals, and aggregations,

including Europeana itself. In particular it does not support such activities as loans and

acquisition. Its strength lies with its ability to support the full range of descriptive information

about museum objects.

LIDO is made up of a nested set of ‘wrapper’ and ‘set’ elements which structure records in

culturally significant ways. An important part in its design is the concept of events taken from

the CIDOC CRM. So, for example, the creation, collection, and use of an object are defined

as events which have associated entities such as date, places and actors. These are all

represented in a consistent way in the schema.

The structural elements of LIDO contain ‘data elements’ which hold the information that is

being harvested and ultimately delivered to the user of the service environment.

LIDO also allows for the recording of information about the sources for data (e.g. in a book)

and controlled terminology (e.g. the identification code for a term in a thesaurus).

***Relationship with ATHENA Ingester Server\***

Our work also takes into account the ATHENA Ingestion Server4, a web service developed by

WP7 that implements LIDO as data model. WP7 is also taking part to the WP4 working

group and is a support for evaluating the possibility of an Ingester-like tool for the

management of terminology.

With this Ingester users can:

1. Map their metadata to LIDO.

1 See D3.3 Lido-0-8.pdf at: http://www.athenaeurope.org/getFile.php?id=535

2 http://museum.zib.de/museumdat/cdwalite_and_museumdat.pdf

3 http://www.collectionstrust.org.uk/schema

4 More information on the ATHENA Ingester on the training section of the ATHENA website:

http://www.athenaeurope.org/index.php?en/159/training

5/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

2. Declare their collections are available to be ingested into Europeana.

One feature of the Ingester is that it can take into account the organisational structure of a

cultural institution, and therefore make it possible for users to be managed efficiently. It also

has a preview of how records will look in Europeana.

**2.2.** **Audience and required skills**

The audience for this deliverable are the staff in European museums. It aims to provide a set

of guidelines for the SKOSification and mapping of terminologies. This type of work is

usually carried out by those with skills in information engineering, specifically in computing

and knowledge management. Most museum staff do not have these skills, and the cost to get

them is high.

To overcome this barrier we will introduce the issues, methods and tools that the reader needs

to be aware of in order able to take full advantage of the guidelines. They will also define the

areas of work that might require specialist technical help. The point is also to define the tasks

and work that might require a technical help and make non-experts aware of these aspects.

**2.3.** **Basic concepts**

**2.3.1.** **About terminology**

In the first deliverable of the WP4 we identified different types of terminology resources.

Here is a reminder:

So far we have used the word “terminology” for the resources used by the museums in

describing their collections. However “terminology” might be ambiguous. Strictly speaking

“terminology” is a discipline for the studying of terms and their use within a specific domain;

but a “terminology” can also refer to the resource resulting from this discipline. However

“terminology” is still the most common word used for the different types of resources:

• Lexicon

• Dictionary

• Folksonomy

• Glossary

• Classification

• Taxonomy

• Thesaurus

• Controlled vocabulary

• Terminology

• Ontology

The type of resource used is highly connected to its purpose. An information retrieval tool and

a knowledge management tool may not use the same kind of resource:

6/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

• Some of the resources mentioned above (e.g. lexicons and dictionaries) are mainly

dedicated to linguistic concerns, not for a specific domain, and for the use of human

beings only. Lexicons and dictionaries deal with words and not with terms.

• Some other resources such as folksonomy are directly managed by non-expert users in

order to improve access to the information in a collaborative way.

• The other resources mentioned (e.g. classification, thesaurus, ontology) are more

formal, being presented as alphabetical lists or networks of terms, and they can be

specific to a domain. They can be used by computational programs for different

purposes such as indexing or translating but are also meant to be handled by experts of

a domain. Most of these resources deal with terms or concepts rather than words.

Here we focus on the “thesaurus” as this kind of resource was recommended in the D4.1.

Indeed thesauri can be easily used for the mapping of in-house terminologies to a reference

one. Thus here we provide a definition to make it explicit in which sense we use the term.

**Thesaurus** :

A thesaurus can be defined as “a networked collection of controlled vocabulary terms”.

Thesauri allow the connection of terms using several types of relationships which can be

hierarchical, associative, equivalence or definition. This means that a thesaurus uses

associative relationships in addition to parent-child relationships. A parent-child relationship

is expressed by a Broader Term (BT) /Narrower Term (NT) feature. Associative relationships

in a thesaurus such as “Related Term” (RT) (e.g. term A is related to term B) are used to

express relationships that are neither hierarchical nor equivalent. Equivalence is expressed by

the USE (e.g. preferred term)/ Used For (UF) (e.g. non-preferred term). Additional

information such as definition or remark can be included in a Scope Note (SN). The

equivalence relationship is especially useful within multilingual thesauri.

Several standards have been established to provide guidance for the elaboration of this kind of

terminology. The standards are:

*ISO 2788:1986: Guidelines for the establishment and development of monolingual*

*thesauri:* This standard recognized by the International Organization for Standardization)

consists of recommendations for the establishment and development of consistent

indexing practice within an organization or a consortium. The standard assumes that

indexing is being done by humans using natural language to select indexing terms. It is

most suitable for cataloguing and descriptive metadata. The standard only deals with

monolingual thesauri and is based on the use of preferred terms or indexing terms and

non-preferred terms or synonyms

• *ISO 5964: 1985: Guidelines for the establishment and development of multilingual*

*thesauri:* This ISO standard extends the scope of ISO 2788 to cover particular

considerations for multilingual thesauri development for the establishment of consistent

indexing practice within an organization or consortium. Like ISO 2788, the standard

assumes that indexing is being done by humans using normal language, and is based on

the concept of preferred terms or indexing terms and non-preferred terms or synonyms.

The standard covers general problems, language problems and management decisions

required when establishing a multilingual thesaurus. It considers the issues of vocabulary

7/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

control, establishing equivalent terms across different languages, relationship between

terms, display of terms and relationships, form and contents and organization of work.

• *ANSI/NISO Z39.19-2003: Guidelines for the Construction, Format, and Management of*

*Monolingual Thesauri:* This Standard presents guidelines and conventions for the

contents, display, construction, testing, maintenance, and management of thesauri. It

covers all aspects of constructing thesauri including extensive rules and guidelines for

term selection and format, the use of compound terms, and establishing and displaying

various types of relationships among terms. This standard focuses on monolingual

thesauri; it has been revised in 2005 in order to extend its scope to controlled

vocabularies e.g. lists of controlled terms, taxonomies, thesauri*.*

• *BS8723: Structured Vocabularies for Information Retrieval:* This standard, which is a

British adaption of the ISO 2788, intends to take into account every kind of terminology

not only thesauri and focuses also on the interoperability between vocabularies.

**2.3.2.** **Semantic Web**

The Semantic Web (part of Web 3.0) is “the Web of data with meaning in the sense that a

computer program can learn enough about what the data means to process it”1. It provides “a

common framework that allows data to be shared and reused across application, enterprise,

and community boundaries. It is a collaborative effort led by World Wide Web Consortium

(W3C) with participation from a large number of researchers and industrial partners. It is

based on the Resource Description Framework (RDF), which integrates a variety of

applications using XML for syntax and URIs for naming. It was proposed by World Wide

Web inventor Tim Berners-Lee”2

.

As we can read on Wikipedia3:

“*Semantic Web is a term coined by World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) director Tim*

*Berners-Lee. It describes methods and technologies to allow machines to understand*

*the meaning - or "semantics" - of information on the World Wide Web*.”

The availability of machine-readable metadata would enable automated agents and other

software to access the Web more intelligently. The agents would be able to perform tasks

automatically and locate related information on behalf of the user.

While the term “Semantic Web” is not formally defined it is mainly used to describe the

model and technologies proposed by the W3C. These technologies include the Resource

Description Framework (RDF), a variety of data interchange formats (e.g. RDF/XML, N3,

Turtle, N-Triples), and notations such as RDF Schema (RDFS) and the Web Ontology

Language (OWL), all of which are intended to provide a formal description of concepts,

terms, and relationships within a given knowledge domain.

1 http://www.w3.org/People/Berners-Lee/Weaving/glossary.html

2 http://www.uen.org/core/edtech/glossary.shtml#S

3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_Web

8/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

Many of the technologies proposed by the W3C already exist and are used in various projects.

The Semantic Web as a global vision, however, has remained largely unrealized and its critics

have questioned the feasibility of the approach. These critics mainly stem from ethical issues

(respect of privacy) and practical feasibility (general user behavior and personal preferences).

In addition other technologies with similar goals, such as microformats, have evolved, which

are not always described as “Semantic Web”.

In order to overcome these critics and apprehension the Semnatic Web provide a set of

standards and tools which enable a machine to process knowledge itself instead of text using

processes similar to human reasoning and inference for obtaining more meaningful results.

**2.3.3.** **Linked Data**

As a first definition we can say1:

“*In Semantic Web terminology, Linked Data is the term used to describe a method of*

*exposing and connecting data on the Web from different sources. Currently, the Web*

*uses hypertext links that allow people to move from one document to another. The idea*

*behind Linked Data is that hyperdata links will let people or machines find related*

*data on the Web that was not previously linked. The main point is that the focus is*

*more about data and how to create and maintain links between these data than*

*documents and links between documents.*”

Here is a more “official” definition from Tim Berners-Lee2:

“*The Semantic Web isn't just about putting data on the web. It is about making links,*

*so that a person or machine can explore the web of data. With linked data, when you*

*have some of it, you can find other, related, data.*

*Like the web of hypertext, the Web of data is constructed with documents on the web.*

*However, unlike the web of hypertext, where links are relationships anchors in*

*hypertext documents written in HTML, for data they links between arbitrary things*

*described by RDF,. The URIs identify any kind of object or concept. But for HTML*

*or RDF, the same expectations apply to make the Web grow:*

*1.* *Use URIs to identify things (anything, concrete or abstract things, not just*

*2.* *3.* *4.* *documents)*

*Use HTTP URIs so that people can look up those things.*

*Provide useful information using standards (RDF\*, SPARQL) when someone*

*looks up a URI*

*Include links to other URIs (RDF links generally) to enable the discovery of*

*related information.”*

1 http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/L/Linked_Data.html

2 http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html

9/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**2.3.4.** **Formats**

In order to be part of the Linked Data ‘cloud’ and use Semantic Web technologies the

terminology of an institution has to be in compliant format. When you want to represent or

model your terminology, and to exploit it on the Web, you have to use a format standard. The

most commonly used format standards are SKOS, OWL, RDF, and XML. Some of them can

be combined, and some of them can be wrapped by others. Using a format standard will result

in the metadata, expressed with your terminology, being effectively represented in a way the

Web technologies can recognize and interpret.

Below are brief descriptions of these format standards with the aim of a better understanding

of their connections.

**XML****1**

XML (Extensible Markup Language) is a set of rules for encoding documents in machine-

readable form. It is defined in the XML 1.0 Specification produced by the W3C, and several

other related specifications, all free to use open standards.

XML's design goals emphasize simplicity, generality, and usability over the Internet. It is a

textual data format, with strong support via Unicode for the languages and scripts of the

world. Although XML's design focuses on documents, it is widely used for the representation

of arbitrary data structures, for example in web services.

There are many programming interfaces that software developers may use to access XML

data, and several schema systems designed to aid in the definition of XML-based languages.

**RDF****2**

The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a family of W3C specifications originally

designed as a metadata data model. It has come to be used as a general method for conceptual

description or modelling of information that is implemented in web resources, using a variety

of syntax formats.

The RDF data model is based upon the idea of making statements about resources (in

particular Web resources) in the form of triples. Triples are the expressions of statements

about resources which are presented as subject-predicate-object expressions. The subject

denotes the resource, and the predicate denotes traits or aspects of the resource and expresses

a relationship between the subject and the object.

The RDF specification is based on the XML encoding.

1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML

2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_Description_Framework

10/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**OWL****1**

The Web Ontology Language (OWL) is a family of knowledge representation languages for

authoring ontologies. The languages are characterised by formal semantics and RDF/XML-

based serializations for the Semantic Web. OWL is endorsed by the World Wide Web

Consortium and has attracted academic, medical and commercial interest.

In October 2007, a new W3C working group was started to extend OWL with several new

features as proposed in the OWL 1.1 member submission. This new version, called OWL 2,

soon found its way into semantic editors such as Protégé and semantic reasoners such as

Pellet, RacerPro and FaCT++. W3C announced the new version on 27 October 2009.

The OWL family contains many species, serializations, syntaxes and specifications with

similar names. This may be confusing unless a consistent approach is adopted. OWL and

OWL2 will be used to refer to the 2004 and 2009 specifications, respectively. Full species

names will be used, including specification version (for example, OWL2 EL). When referring

more generally, OWL Family will be used.

OWL is based on the RDF specification.

**SKOS**

In this set of formats, SKOS is more and more required by web services. Europeana for

instance has decided to format in SKOS all the metadata they harvest for a homogeneous and

effective exploitation of the resources, of the data and their related descriptions. SKOS is

based on the RDF specification and enable a migration towards OWL ontologies.

SKOS is not a formal knowledge representation language since literally a formal knowledge

is expressed as sets of axioms and facts which are the main features of a formal ontology.

SKOS is rather used for modeling controlled vocabularies such as thesauri or classifications

which are of a different nature than ontologies. The ideas or meanings described by thesauri

or other kinds of terminology are referred to as “concepts” even if from the ontological point

of view a concept is defined in a different way.

The next section defines more precisely what SKOS is and what its features are.

1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Ontology_Language

11/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**3.** **SKOS and terminology mapping**

**3.1.** **SKOS**

Europeana requires that the object and collection descriptions of the museums are expressed

with a terminology resource designed or converted in the SKOS format. Thus we document

here what SKOS is. Then we introduce a specific format, ATHENA Format, that is currectly

set up by the WP4. This ATHENA Format is detailed as a SKOS-compliant reference format

for all the museums’ terminologies.

SKOS stands for Simple Knowledge Organization System and is the result of several years of

work in the field of the Semantic Web. SKOS was first designed within the Semantic Web

Advances Development for Europe Project (SWAD-Europe) working group before being

submitted to the W3C1. SKOS has been acknowledged as a W3C recommendation in August

2009.

The official documents presenting the SKOS data model2 often make an opposition and

parallelism between unstructured data/human-readable and structured data/machine-readable

data. The aim of SKOS is the better organization of unstructured data and the making of it

meaningful.

The overall aim of SKOS, in conformity with the spirit of the Semantic Web, is to bring

together information from different fields and communities of practice. The purpose of SKOS

is to share and link knowledge organization systems (KOS) via the Web and allow semantic

interoperability between terminologies of different types and languages.

**3.1.1.** **Main features**

As a Semantic Web compliant format, SKOS is concept-oriented. This means that the

fundamental element of a terminology designed in SKOS is the concept and not the term that

expresses this concept.

The SKOS data model consists of a basic structure that can be extended by specific classes for

detailing lexical parts or semantic relations between the concepts of the terminology.

The SKOS reference publication summarizes the main features of the SKOS model as

follows3:

1 World Wide Web Consortium: International community that develops standards to ensure the long-term growth of

the Web. http://www.w3.org/

2 SKOS Reference : http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-skos-reference-20090818/ (18th of August 2009)

SKOS Primer : http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-primer/ (18th of August 2009)

3 SKOS Reference : http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-skos-reference-20090818/ (18th of August 2009)

12/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

“*Using SKOS, can be identified using URIs, with lexical strings in one or more natural*

*languages, assigned (lexical codes), with various types of note, and organized into*

*informal hierarchies and association networks, aggregated into, grouped into, labeled*

*and/or ordered , and to concepts in other schemes.*”

SKOS data are expressed as RDF triples. This means that concepts may be subject or object

and related via a SKOS property which would be the predicate.

As RDF triples, SKOS concepts van be identified using URIs. These URIs can be defined

according standard persistent identifier systems. The SKOS data model doesn’t require the

use of persistent identifiers but in a Linked Open Data perspective, their use is highly

recommended. Persistent identifiers will be described more precisely in the following

sections.

The SKOS datamodel consists in three main components: classes, properties and relations.

These three components always start with the prefix “*skos:*”. The distinction between a class

and a property is done through the case: the element following the “skos:” prefix starts with

an upper-case character when it is a class, e.g. *skos:Concept* and *skos:ConceptScheme* are

classes; if the element following the “skos:” prefix starts with a lower case character, this

means that the element is a property and not a class. For example *skos:prefLabel* is a property.

***Concept\***

SKOS is a concept-oriented data model therefore the concept is the central element of the

terminology. From a terminology point of view a concept can be defined as an idea, notion or

unit of thought. A concept in SKOS is introduced as a class *skos:Concept.* Some bridges

between the SKOS data model and the OWL one are available for a better interoperability.

The skos:Concept class is an instance of *owl:class* which is a class from the OWL data model

so that connections between the two data models are enabled.

SKOS concepts can be brought together into two classes:

• SKOS concept scheme

• SKOS collections

**Concept Schemes**

A concept scheme is a way to bring together several concepts. A concept scheme is

introduced by the class *skos:ConceptScheme*. An individual concept scheme roughly

corresponds to the notion of an individual thesaurus, classification scheme or any other

knowledge organization system.

It is important to mention that a same concept can be part of more than one concept scheme.

**Concept collections**

13/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

A collection is a group of SKOS concepts. A collection is introduced by the main class

*skos:Collection*. Although another class *skos:OrderedCollection* can also be used in the case

where the order of the concepts within the collection has an importance.

The notion of collection is different from the concept scheme. For the migration of a

thesaurus for example, the whole could be considered as a concept scheme where several

thematic groups of concepts could be designed as collections.

***Identifiers\***

Each concept must be identified in a unique way in order to avoid any ambiguity. As it is the

case in the RDF language and as a general principle of the Semantic Web and Linked data, it

is recommended to use HTTP URIs in order to identify the concepts of terminology.

The identifiers are introduced by a specific RDF property *rdf:resource* which is used each

time that a new concept is introduced or semantic relations or mapping to other concepts are

included in the description of the concept.

***Labels\***

The SKOS model focuses on concepts therefore there is a distinction between the concept

itself and the terms that may used to express this concept. Terms referring to a concept can be

expressed via lexical labels according to the SKOS data model. A lexical label is a string of

Unicode characters which allows you to have a term in any language with or without Latin

characters.

The SKOS data model defines 3 types of lexical label:

• Preferred label

• Alternative label

• Hidden label

The use of these different types of label enables the understanding of the concept and is useful

for human-readable knowledge representation. The use of labels is not mandatory in the

SKOS datamodel but is highly recommended especially for maintenance purposes.

**Preferred label**

The preferred label, introduced in the SKOS data model as the *skos:prefLabel* property,

corresponds to the notion of descriptor from the standards for the elaboration of thesauri (ISO

2788 and ISO 5694).

The SKOS data model does not allow there to be more than one preferred label in the same

language.

14/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Alternative label**

Alternative labels, introduced as *skos:altLabel* property, are mainly used to give synonyms to

the preferred label or other ways to refer to this preferred label, e.g. different spellings or

acronyms.

The SKOS model does not forbid the exclusive use of alternative labels instead of one

preferred label and many alternative labels.

**Hidden label**

Hidden labels, introduced by the *skos:hiddenLabel* property, may be used for mentioning the

misspellings of preferred or alternative labels but also for mentioning obsolete forms of a

term.

Alternative and hidden labels correspond roughly to the USE and UF (Used For) indicators

defined in the ISO standards for thesauri.

By definition, hidden labels are not visible but are very useful for the retrieval.

Obviously the SKOS data model does not allow the use of the same string of characters as a

preferred, alternative or hidden label in the same language.

An extension to the SKOS model, SKOS-XL, is proposed for modeling more precisely the

labels and including morphologic or syntactic information on labels.

**Notation**

Another property is available for expressing notations which are different from labels.

Notations are symbols or codes that are not recognizable or understandable in any natural

language.Notations are different from labels which usually are words or expressions

understandable in any natural language. The *skos:notation* can then be used for example in the

case of classifications where a code refers to a term referring itself to a concept. The notation

can be more convenient than using an alternative label since it is considered as unambiguous

and language independent.

***Documentation properties\***

The SKOS model offers a variety of possibilities to provide information related to concepts.

Different types of notes can be used to give the most accurate information. These notes can be

of different natures (plain text, image, quotes …) and be used without any restriction.

The different types of notes that can be used to document a concept are:

15/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

• Note (*skos:note*)

• Change note (*skos:changeNote*)

• Definition (*skos:definition*)

• Editorial note (*skos:editorialNote*)

• Example (*skos:example*)

• History note (*skos:historyNote*)

• Scope note (*skos:scopeNote*)

The *skos:note* can be used to provide general documentation on a concept. All the other types

are specializations of this general property.

The *skos:changeNote* and *editorialNote* are mainly useful for the purpose of administration

and maintenance. The *skos:definition*, *skos:example*, *skos:historyNote* are useful for providing

information on the concept for a better understanding of its meaning.

As for labels, documentation properties can be provided in different languages by using

language tags with the *xml:lang* attribute.

***Semantic relations\***

The power of the SKOS model lies in the semantic relations that can be used to connect

between different concepts. These semantic relations play a crucial role for defining concepts.

There are two different categories of semantic relation:

• Hierarchical

• Associative

**Hierarchical relations**

Hierarchical relations are introduced via two properties, *skos:broader* and *skos:narrower*. The

*skos:broader* property is used to assert that a concept has more general meaning.

*skos:narrower* is the inverse property used to assert that a concept has a more specific

meaning.

One concept can have more than one broader concept or more than one narrower concept.

It is important to note that these two properties only assert direct/immediate hierarchical link

between two concepts. In order to enable non-immediate link between two concepts, the

SKOS model provides two other properties that are transitive. The graph below provides an

example of this case:

16/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

***Figure 1: Graph illustrating the skos:NarrowerTransitive property\***

The use of *skos:broaderTransitive* property is necessary to assert that “persons” is broader

than “architects”.

As for the skos:broader and skos:narrower, the properties *skos:boaderTransitive* and

*skos:narrowerTransitive* are the inverse of each other.

**Associative relations**

The property *skos:related* is used to assert an associative link between two concepts. This

property may be useful to make a link between a concept and another one which is neither an

equivalent nor a broader/narrower concept. It is important to note that the *skos:related*

property is symmetric.

For example it is possible to state that “monuments” is related to “buildings”. Then by

symmetry it is also possible to state that “buildings” is related to “monuments”.

***Figure 2: Graph illustrating the skos:related property\***

17/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

*skos:related* is not a transitive property. This means that referring to the previous example, if

we state that “buildings” is related to “construction”, it does not follow that “monuments” is

related to “construction”. The dotted arrow illustrate that this semantic relation between

“monuments” and “construction” cannot be deduced via the transitivity but have to be

asserted separately.

It is very important to keep in mind that, according to the guidelines provided in ISO 2788

and BS8723, mixing associative relations and hierarchical relations is not consistent with the

SKOS data model. Therefore a special attention must be paid to the semantic relationships

between concepts.

***Mapping\***

The SKOS data model provides several mapping properties for making alignment between

concepts from different concept schemes. These properties are :

• *skos:closeMatch*

• *skos:exactMatch*

• *skos:broadMatch*

• *skos:narrowMatch*

• *skos:relatedMatch*

As for semantic relations between concepts, the mapping properties can be associative or

hierarchical. The *skos:broadMatch* and *skos:narrowMatch* properties are used for a

hierarchical mapping link between concepts whereas the *skos:relatedMatch* property is used

for an associative one. Exactly as for semantic relations, *skos:broadMatch* is the inverse

property of *skos:narrowMatch*.

The properties *skos:closeMatch* and skos*:exactMatch* are used to make a mapping link

between concepts that are very similar or equal so they can be used interchangeably. The

*skos:exactMatch* property is transitive and symmetric.

Mapping properties are used rather than semantic relations in order to make mapping links

between concepts from different concept schemes. In the case of a same concept scheme

semantic relationships will be used instead of mapping properties.

As for semantic relations, there may be some conflicts in mixing hierarchical mapping

properties with associative ones.

**3.2.** **Methodology for mapping**

**3.2.1.** **Mapping process**

With regards to the context we have described above, we call “mapping process” the way to

relate different terminologies together. The term “mapping” is usually used to refer to the

alignment of data models or metadata schemes which are, in other words, a grammar. In the

context of this work package, we only focus on the mapping of terminology which is the18/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

semantic part of this grammar. The process and methodology for mapping are the same in

both cases but the purpose and the use cases may be different.

In the case we are concerned with, namely terminology mapping, the objective is to relate in-

house terminologies with a reference thesaurus compliant with Europeana requirements.

Basically the mapping process consists in the alignment of terms between the terminologies.

Such mapping is the result of a multiplicity of particular relations. Every relation between one

term of an in-house terminology and one term of the reference thesaurus may have a strict

type among all the possibilities given by the format for alignment. However every relation

may have a specific purpose out of a systematic organisation. The reason or motivation of

every relation may be made explicit, or not. The alignment may relate terms in different

languages so that multilinguality is taken into account without using a specific language for

translation.

In the case of mapping of terminology resources we identified several theoretical cases.

**3.2.2.** **Theoretical cases**

Here we give an overview of all the theoretical cases of mapping we can envisage in the case

of ATHENA project. This overview is the combination of two main sources:

• “About alignment and linking of terminologies”: An article of Jean Delahousse

(Mondeca) (article available in French1)

• “Guidelines for Multilingual Thesauri”: A report of IFLA (International Federation of

Library Associations and institutions)2

As proposed in the Mondeca article about mapping, let us distinguish between

“alignment”and “linking”. We talk about “alignment” when the two terms mapped together

are strictly describing the same domain. We talk about “linking” when these two terms can

describe different domains, and there is a reason for their mapping.

Keeping in mind this distinction, we can consider:

• The strict alignment of terms without any necessary precision

o Because the terminologies describe the same domain

o And/or the terms are strictly equivalent in the same language

o And/or the terms are strictly equivalent in different languages

• The linking of terms with a need of precision at the terminology level (through

concept schemes or others)

o Because the terminologies describe complementary domains

o And/or the terminologies describe the same domain but with more or less

precision

1 http://mondeca.wordpress.com/2009/06/29/sur-l%E2%80%99alignement-et-la-mise-en-correspondance-de-

terminologies/

2 http://archive.ifla.org/VII/s29/pubs/Profrep115.pdf

19/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

o And/or the terminologies describe the same domain but according to different

points of view

• The linking of terms with a need of precision at the terms level (through notes or

others)

o Because the terms are not strictly equivalent in the same language even if the

domains are the same

o Because the terms are not strictly equivalent in the different languages even if

the domains are the same

**4.** **WP4 experiment**

In the follow-up to the D4.1, we decided to start an experiment about terminology

management. One objective of this experiment was to have a better understanding of the

possibilities for all the tasks concerned with the construction of a reference thesaurus, the

ATHENA Thesaurus. For the management of a terminology resource, we identified six steps

described in the next section. Even if SKOSification and mapping are just two of these six

steps, this experiment was especially focused on these specific areas. It appeared to us that we

should put them into a larger context to provide guidelines that are more precise and valuable.

So the first aim of this experiment consisted of understanding better the use cases and the

logical processes concerned by what we could call “terminology management by European

Museums in regards with Europeana requirements”. Consequently the objective was to raise

all the related issues that museums have to deal with them1. This effort enabled us to make

explicit our understanding of the museums’ needs for tools and functionalities. So we

structured a grid of needs which allows us to organise a benchmark2 of all the existing

initiatives and tools that could be helpful to meet these needs.

We have taken into account the information we got during a technical workshop3 that was

organised about the benchmark. For that workshop we asked the speakers to follow our grid

of needs as an outline for their presentation. By improving our knowledge on the selection of

tools, the main objectives were to obtain an effective overview of how we can, partially or

totally, meet user needs with existing technologies.

Described in the following sections are:

• The process of the ATHENA Thesaurus construction, and all the issues we raised

• The methodology we used for creating a first version of the ATHENA Thesaurus

• And the results of the experiment.

1 http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Process_and_issues

2 http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Benchmark

3 the workshop took place in Paris at 25th June 2010

20/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**4.1.** **Process and issues**

For the construction and maintenance of the ATHENA Thesaurus, we identified six main

steps:

1. 3. 4. 5. 6. Registration of an in-house terminology in the platform repository
2. SKOSification of this terminology

Search and navigation into a network of lists of terms (i.e. the ATHENA Thesaurus)

Mapping of the terminology with the ATHENA Thesaurus

Enrichment of the ATHENA Thesaurus

Collaborative moderation of updates/modifications of the thesaurus

All the details about what they precisely are, and about the related issues, are given in the

Annexes of this deliverable. Below we just give details about the two steps that this

deliverable deals with: SKOSification and mapping.

**4.1.1.** **SKOSification use cases**

You work for a European museum, and you are in charge of the mapping of the terminology

used in your institution with a reference thesaurus compliant with Europeana requirements.

Now your terminology has to be SKOSified before any mapping.

*First case:*

Your in-house terminology is already SKOSified and you want to check if the SKOSification

result is correct. To check if it is well-SKOSified, you use a web service enabling you to

precisely know what mistakes you have made based on the SKOS model. Then you take into

account this feedback and use that web service, or another one, to refine the SKOS version of

your terminology. You repeat the process until your terminology is well-SKOSified.

The W3C offers on line a validation tool but it doesn’t take into account the latest version of

the SKOS model1. Pool Party, a thesaurus management system, offers online SKOS services2

for converting and checking the consistency of your SKOS thesaurus.

*Second case:*

Your in-house terminology is not SKOSified. To SKOSify your terminology, you use a web

service, or carry out the conversion with other technical tools, enabling you to express

correctly based on the SKOS data model your terminology features and terms. Then as

described above, you check the result in order to verify that your terminology is well-

SKOSified, and iteratively refine it while it is necessary.

1 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/validation

2 http://demo.semantic-web.at:8080/SkosServices/index

21/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

*Technical remark:*

Technically speaking, we met different situations where a specific schema for transformation

had to be defined. Indeed when you want to transform one resource into SKOS you can apply

schemas. During our work we noticed several cases illustrated by the following schema:

***Figure 3: Transformation cases for SKOSification\***

The input file to be converted, e.g. “SKOSified”, may be a file containing text (e.g. a Word

document or a PDF file), a spreadsheet file (e.g. Excel), or a structured document in XML

format. Text files in proprietary formats can be converted with specific editing and conversion

tools in order to get an XML transition format. For Word documents a command-line tool

“Antiword” can convert it into TXT or XML format. For a PDF file, a manual export can be

made in order to get a TXT version. From this text version an XML transition format can be

obtained via some scripts or manual transformations. For Excel files, there is a possibility

with the latest versions of Microsoft Excel or OpenOffice Calc to save the file as an XML

document; some other tools for conversion into XML exist but are often shareware tools for

example: ConvertXLS1 which can convert Excel files in any output format. Other XML

dedicated tools can also proceed to the conversion: for example Oxygen2. A very recent

shareware tool, Altova MapForce 20113 allow to convert Excel data into XML and proceed to

data mapping. Some tools have been recently developed to convert directly from Excel format

to SKOS format.

Whatever the input format is, the use of XLST transformations for converting the transition

XML format into the adapted SKOS version cannot be avoided. In order to perform these

transformations, the user have to know well the structure of the terminology and be able to

map the elements of its terminology to the SKOS datamodel. Then a person with technical

1 http://www.softinterface.com/Convert-XLS/Convert-XLS-T.htm

2 http://www.oxygenxml.com

3 http://www.altova.com/download-excel-mapper.html?gclid=CJLv7InOhKQCFQYf3wodjjGiGw

22/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

skills especially a good knowledge of XML and XLST languages would implement the

mapping set by the user to proceed to the SKOSification.

Till now we identified these situations, but others could be experimented with in the future,

and other ways to get the final result may be found. To experiment with all the possibilities is

important since there is no ideal method for all the situations. A case-by-case approach is

necessary.

**4.1.2.** **Mapping use cases**

You work for a European museum, and you are in charge of the mapping of the terminology

used in your institution with a reference thesaurus compliant with Europeana requirements.

Your in-house terminology is already registered in a dedicated repository, and it is also

SKOSified.

*Main case:*

In order to map your terminology with the reference thesaurus, you have browsed all the lists

of terms proposed by the thesaurus. Among them, you are interested in some terms for your

first mapping.

You identify the terms of your in-house terminology that you would like to map with those of

the reference thesaurus, and you relate them. You define the type of semantic relationship

between the terms according to the mapping format which enables to set equivalencies as

exact, close or narrower/broader match. If necessary you make explicit the purpose of this

relation in order to disambiguate.

*Alternative 1:*

You are already registered and SKOSified in-house terminology has previously been mapped

with the reference thesaurus. You intend to change or to create relations to refine the

alignment. As in the main case you can browse the thesaurus lists of terms and the terms of

your in-house terminology. Most of all you can consult and edit the current version of the

mapping, that is, the details of the relations.

*Alternative 2:*

Your in-house terminology has already been registered and SKOSified, and you work on its

mapping the reference thesaurus. After a search in the thesaurus lists of terms you do not find

the suitable terms to map to your own. Therefore you would like to enrich the reference

thesaurus by proposing terms. In other words, you are going to propose an update of the

reference thesaurus. The reason for the proposed update must be explained. In this case the

mapping of your terminology is one step of an iterative loop for the refinement of the

reference thesaurus. If your proposal is agreed to, the new version of the reference thesaurus

will have the terms you proposed in it. You can now relate your terms with the reference

thesaurus in an effective manner, especially if these new terms come from your in-house

terminology.

23/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**4.2.** **Benchmark Results**

In parallel to the setting up of a first version of the ATHENA Thesaurus, we made a

benchmark of all the existing iniatives that have at least some of the functions of the 6 steps

of the process of terminology management. This benchmark can be summarized in the

following figure:

**Figure 4 : Benchmark**

ThManager1 is an editing tool for SKOS thesauri which allow to registrate in an internal

database several thesauri.

SKOSed2 is a plug-in for the Protege software which is an ontology management tool.

Annocultor3 is a set of command-line tools which allow to SKOSify a large number of

terminology resources.

xTree4 is a web service for editing and enriching a SKOS terminology.

The Athena Ingester5 presented above doesn’t manage terminology but present interesting and

useful features for terminology management.

Cyclops6 is a graphical mapping tool that could be adapted in order to map terminologies.

As we suspected, our benchmark confirmed there is no ideal tool for terminology

management, i.e.:

• Able to cover the whole process (the six steps);

• Manage a user-friendly GUI and a powerful engine for display, search, and edition;

• Manage the gap of skills in-between those of the Museum people and those required

by information engineering.

Therefore we can only say:

1 http://thmanager.sourceforge.net

2 http://code.google.com/p/skoseditor/

3 http://annocultor.eu

4 http://www.digicult-sh.de/

5 http://athena.image.ntua.gr/athena

6 http://www.utc.fr/caspar/wiki/pmwiki.php?n=Main.Proto

24/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

• We can recommend tools and methods separately for each step

• We can imagine for the future a complete environment integrating the whole process

For the SKOSification process, which is the main concern of this deliverable, we note that

there is no generic tool that can convert into SKOS of any input file. This process has to be

managed in a very technical way and knowledge and technical skills of a computer engineer

may be required.

*N.B.: All the details concerning main tools for terminology mapping and SKOSification are in*

*the Annexes.*

**4.3.** **Means**

In order to support our experiment we used the following means:

**4.3.1.** **Working group activity**

All the activity of the work package is supported by a working group (WG4). Mixing

ATHENA partners and external experts, the working group takes advantage of the knowledge

of the project issues in terms of usability in European museums, and the skills of experts in

the domain of information engineering.

After the finalisation of the deliverable D4.1 the working group has met during three events1:

• Budapest technical meeting – 13th November 2009

• Berlin technical meeting –25th February 2010

• Paris workshop – 25th June 2010

***Budapest technical meeting\******2\***

A technical meeting took place in Petofi Museum (Budapest), the 13thof November 2009.

This provided an opportunity to present the collaborative tool we set up for helping with work

group activity (see below the specific part about the ATHENA Wiki).

The work group validated the work done on the process of terminology management for

European museums and the list of related issues. Finally we benefited from the feedback of

external experts about our approach. These experts are involved in different important

projects or structures related to our topic: European Film Gateway3, Multimatch4, Europeana

v15, Europeana Connect6, Europeana Office7

.

1 All the information is available at:

http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Documents#Meeting_and_working_documents

2 http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Documents#WG4_Second_meeting_.28Budapest.29

3 http://www.europeanfilmgateway.eu/

4 http://www.multimatch.eu/

5 http://version1.europeana.eu/

6 http://www.europeanaconnect.eu/

7 http://www.europeana.eu/

25/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

***Berlin technical meeting\******1\***

An informal technical meeting took place in Berlin the 25th February 2010, just before an

ATHENA plenary meeting.

We used that slot for giving to the working group some specific feedback about the project

review2, and give information about the tasks to be achieved by WP4 in the following months.

During this meeting we also submitted for validation the format that has been set up for the

ATHENA Thesaurus. This format is available via the ATHENA Wiki and is also detailed in

the next section.

Finally a tool dedicated to the management of SKOS terminology, xTree, developed by the

Digicult3 project was presented in the framework of the benchmark.

***Paris technical workshop\******4\***

A whole day workshop took place in the French Ministry of Culture and Communication

(MCC), Paris, the 25th June 2010.

We provided to the working group a set of presentations of different tools possibly compliant

with the needs we identified about terminology management. Then we summarized the results

of the benchmark we began work on several months before. Finally we benefited from the

experience of external experts about the tools and the methodology. These experts are

involved in different important projects or structures for our topic: EuroVoc5 SKOS model,

ASKOSI6, the MACS7 project, SKOSification of the French thesaurus W for Archives8

.

**4.3.2.** **A collaborative environment**

We have used a wiki for several months as a collaborative environment in which the members

of the working group could (and still can) find back information and officially discuss ideas

and results. We chose a wiki because it is quite easy to install on a server, and rather simple to

manipulate as a contributor.

Technically speaking we decided to use Mediawikias wiki engine for two main reasons. First

it is widely used (e.g. in Wikipedia) and several plug-ins could help us in our task. The plug-

in *Semantic MediaWiki* allows for management of all the content of the Wiki in a Semantic

Web oriented way. In addition, we also integrated Halo, which is a “Semantic plug-in”

enabling the user to put categories and properties on pages as tags and annotations and

providing a graphical interface for managing these annotations. Such a feature can be very

useful in the collaborative activity as we imagined.

1 http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Documents - WG4_Third_meeting_.28Berlin.29

2 The project review took place in Luxemburg the 2nd February 2010

3 http://www.digicult-sh.de/

4 http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Documents - WG4_Technical_workshop_.28Paris.29

5 http://eurovoc.europa.eu/

6 http://askosi.org/

7 http://www.athenaeurope.org/getFile.php?id=662

8 http://www.athenaeurope.org/getFile.php?id=661

26/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

The wiki is available online at without any restriction:

http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki

Contributors are invited to create a user account to be able to make any modification.

**4.4.** **ATHENA Format**

The ATHENA Format is the format in which the ATHENA Thesaurus is expressed. The WP4

working group agreed on the methodology and the format that were presented during the

technical meeting in Berlin (February 2010) for the elaboration of the ATHENA

Thesaurus.This format is proposed to the museums who want to map their own terminologies

with the ATHENA Thesaurus. In this case, they have to use the ATHENA Format in order to

form their descriptions before mapping. As a SKOS-compliant format, the ATHENA Format

guarantees to the museums that their descriptions meet the Europeana requirement regarding

SKOS.

Although SKOS is a basic structure for the formal representation of controlled vocabularies, it

can be extended and customized very easily to have a more precise description of the terms

and also include lexical elements related to these terms. The ATHENA Format is mainly

based on the SKOS core data model, and it has been inspired by the museumvok format1 in

order to include some specific details.

**4.4.1.** **Metadata**

The metadata part of the ATHENA Format is intending to provide administrative information

on the terminology that has been converted in SKOS.

dc:title

dc:creator

dc:contributor

**Metadata**

dc:description

dc:source

dc:language

status

These elements are borrowed from the Dublin Core data model (with the prefix “dc:”) and

provide details about the terminology. Designing the metadata of the terminology in Dublin

Core could eventually enable the OAI harvesting in the context of a repository or database of

lexical or terminology resources.

1 http://museum.zib.de/museumsvokabular/index.php?main=tech-dok&ls=9&co=we

27/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

The last element is not part of the Dublin Core data model but may be useful to check if the

SKOS version of the terminology has a ‘valid’, ‘in validation’ or ‘draft’ status.

This set of elements is defined in order to get the same information for all the terminology

resources that will be transformed into SKOS within the ATHENA project.

**4.4.2.** **Concept**

skos:Concept

skos:ConceptScheme

**Concept**

skos:inScheme

skos:hasTopConcept

*skos:topConceptOf*

As we already said, the concept is the central element of the SKOS data model. The data

model makes a distinction between classes and properties. The first items of the table above

*skos:Concept* and *skos:ConceptScheme* are classes whereas the next items (*skos:inScheme*,

*skos:hasTopConcept*, *skos:topConceptOf*) are properties.

The property *skos:topConceptOf* is set in italics because it is the inverse property of

skos:hasTopConcept then duplication of these two properties for linking two same concepts is

not useful. Therefore this property is optional. When a property is the inverse of another one it

supposes that only the subject or the object of an assertion need to have the mention of the

property. A same concept cannot have these two properties at the same time with the same

object.

For example:

A *skos:hasTopConcept* B

B *skos:topConceptOf* A

These two assertions express the same information then it is possible to use only one of them

and avoid duplication of information.

**4.4.3.** **Collection**

**concept Collection**

skos:Collection

skos:member

*skos:OrderedCollection*

28/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

*skos:memberList*

The class for ordered collection and the corresponding property are set in italics to highlight

that this is a possibility offered by the SKOS data model but it has to be used only if the order

of the concepts within the collection is really relevant.

As we intend to bring together very different terminologies with very different scopes, the

notion of collection may be useful to set these concepts as groups within the ATHENA

Thesaurus. Indeed, some terminologies are only used for indexing, others are designed to

improve information retrieval. Some terminologies are aiming at professionnals whereas

others are reachable by general public. The notion of collection can help to bring consistency

among this diversity and give a facility to create thematic groups.

**4.4.4.** **Description**

**skos:prefLabel**

skos: altLabel

skos:hiddenLabel

*skos:notation*

skos:changeNote

**concept Description**

skos:definition

skos:editorialNote

skos:example

*skos:historyNote*

*skos:note*

skos:scopeNote

In this description block, we include the three different types of lexical labels. The preferred

label is set in bold font because we define it as a mandatory property for the ATHENA

Thesaurus. As we saw in the SKOS section, the SKOS data model does not force the use of

labels for expressing a concept since a concept can be defined only through its semantic

relations. But in the context of the ATHENA Thesaurus which is made from existing thesauri,

the migration from descriptors to labels should be done carefully. Then we consider that the

use of a preferred term is mandatory. We define the *skos:notation* property as optional since

we gathered very few classifications during our inventory phase and therefore we privilege

the use of labels instead of notations.

*skos:note* is the most generic type of note, then in order to force a more precise description of

terms we set this property as optional in the ATHENA format.

*skos:historyNote* is mainly dedicated to keep track of diachronic evolution of terms. As the

terminology resources gathered for the ATHENA thesaurus don’t provide this information in

29/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

most of the cases, we set this property optional. Also, there might be a confusion between the

*skos:historyNote* and the *skos:changeNote*; the *skos:changeNote* is mainly used to keep track

of the evolution of description of a concept, e.g. a change in the labels used to express this

concept or a change in its semantic relations.

Almost all the documentation properties have been included in the ATHENA Format since it

is important to keep as much as possible of the information from the source terminology in

order to keep track of the versions and changes of concepts.

As recommended by the SKOS data model, the language tags introduced in RDF by the

@xml:lang attribute, are set as mandatory in the ATHENA Format in order to enable the

multilingualism and highlight the linguistic richness of the resources that will compose the

ATHENA Thesaurus. This attribute will be used for the labels and the documentation

properties as well.

**4.4.5.** **Relation**

skos:broader

*skos:broaderTransitive*

**concept Relation**

skos:narrower

*skos:narrowerTransitive*

skos:related

These semantic relations constitute the core and the strength of the SKOS data model, and

then it is logical to emphasize them in the ATHENA Format. Although the transitive

properties *skos:broaderTransitive* and *skos:narrowerTransitive* are set in italics, since they

may be useful to make transitive assertions, the use of these properties is optional.

**4.4.6.** **Mapping**

skos:broadMatch

skos:closeMatch

**concept Mapping**

skos:exactMatch

skos:narrowMatch

skos:relatedMatch

As for the semantic relations, the mapping properties constitute the essence of the SKOS data

model. Then these properties will be used in the ATHENA Format to make alignment links

between concepts from different concept schemes.

This section presented the format that will be used for all the terminology resources gathered

during the inventory phase initiated for the first WP4 deliverable in order to constitute the

30/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

ATHENA Thesaurus. We wanted here to emphasize that the main features of the SKOS data

model are reused in this format but although some of these features are made mandatory or

optional in the framework of the ATHENA Thesaurus in order to get a homogeneous

description of very heterogeneous terminologies.

**4.5.** **Experiment results**

**4.5.1.** **Methodology**

After surveying the terminology resources in use in European museums for the D4.1, an

analysis of these resources has been made in that framework. All the in-house terminologies

were gathered and have been organised according to a set of criteria:

• if the terminology is a thesaurus

• if the domain is specialized

• if the the terminology is multilingual

• if it is SKOSified

All the resources that are free of rights have been listed in the dedicated Wiki page.

Considering the huge diversity of terminology types, languages and subjects, we selected

three resources in order to do a first mapping between them and then build a first core of the

ATHENA Thesaurus as a first version.

The three selected resources are very different from each other but there is still an intersection

from the subject and language point of view:

• Michael Terminology lists (Europe) available in 12 languages

• PICO thesaurus (Italy) available in English and Italian

• RMCA thesaurus (Belgium) available in French, English and Flemish

Almost all these terminology resources deal with cultural heritage or culture in its largest

scope. Therefore the granularity and precision of each resource is very different from one to

the other. Considering this, in order to test our guidelines and our final recommendations, we

selected the three resources for their specific properties.

We checked if each of these resources was “ready to map”, that is:

• If it was SKOSified

• If it was proposed with persistent identifiers (URLs/URIs)

• If it was well-licensed for what we intended to do with

• If for that resource we could work with active contributors

31/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

At the beginning of the experiment the state was:

**SKOS** **Persistent**

**identifiers** **License Contributors**

*PICO thesaurus* OK OK OK Giuliana De Francesco (MiBAC) and

Karim Ben Hamida (MiBAC).

*Michael lists* To do To do OK Marie-VéroniqueLeroi (MCC)

*RMCA thesaurus* To do To do OK Roxanne Wyns (RMAH-KMKG)

At this point our experiment consists of achieving the end of the following 3-steps process:

1. *SKOSification*: We contribute to the SKOSification of Michael lists and RMCA
2. 3. thesaurus.

*Mapping*: MICHAEL – RMCA + RMCA – PICO (specific domain of architecture as

an intersection of the three resources)

*Validation*: Three levels of validation:

*a.* Technical validation

*b.* Validation from the contributors of the SKOSified version of the resource

*c.* Validation from the contributors of the mapping links of this resource for the

elaboration of the ATHENA Thesaurus.

This work respects the specific format based on the SKOS core data model and inspired by

the museumvok format (see above the section ATHENA Format), and the result relates with

LIDO. The domain “Architecture” was selected as an intersection of the three selected

resources and is especially interesting because the precision level of description of the terms

and concepts is very different from one resource to another one. Michael subject lists are very

generic whereas the PICO thesaurus is very specific. Therefore this domain is very interesting

from the mapping process point of view for the purpose of he experiment.

**4.5.2.** **Core resources**

Here are, briefly presented, the three main resources we used for building the first version of

the ATHENA Thesaurus.

***MICHAEL Terminology lists\***

**Ti****t****le** Michael Terminology lists - Subjects

**Kind of** **re****sou****rce** Thesaurus

**Count****r****y** International

**L****anguag****e****(s)** English, Czech, German, Estonian, Greek, French, Italian, Latvian, Dutch,

Finnish, Bulgarian, Hungarian, Swedish, Slovenian, Spanish, Polish

32/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**D****e****s****cri****pt****i****on** Terminology lists with thesaurus features for describing collections of the

cultural heritage field.

Domain: general

Based on the Unesco thesauri for the subject headings.

Mainly use for indexing and web browsing of the collections on the portal.

Available in XML format.

**D****i****m****e****ns****i****on** 501-1000

**URL** http://www.michael-culture.org/software/lists.zip

The table above provides a short introduction to the Michael Terminology lists. Several lists

are available for subjects indexing but temporal and spatial indexing as well. For the purpose

of the experiment we only focused on the subjects thesaurus.

***Figure 5: Transformation of the Michael Subjects list\***

While carrying out the SKOSification of this terminology we noticed the following features

and observations:

• The thesaurus has a hierarchy of three levels; each concept is introduced with the

<item> markup and each term is introduced with the <label> markup; the level of

hierarchy is indicated with the attribute “depth” which value is “1”, “2” or “3”

according to the level of hierarchy.

• There are 191 concepts in the terminology

• Issue: Some concepts have the same label as their broader concept

***PICO Thesaurus\***

**Ti****t****le** PICO thesaurus

**Kind of** **re****sou****rce** Thesaurus

**Count****r****y** Italy

**L****anguag****e****(s)** English, Italian

33/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**D****e****s****cri****pt****i****on**

Thesaurus developed by the Italian Ministry of Culture - Ministero per i

beni e le attività culturali (MiBAC)

Mainly use for indexing and web browsing of the collections on the

CulturaItalia portal.

Domain: Italian culture, with special focus on tangible and intangible

heritage; people and organisations involved in cultural processes and

administration; cultural and educational disciplines; chronological periods

Available in SKOS format.

**D****i****m****e****ns****i****on** 501-1000

**URL** http://www.culturaitalia.it/pico/thesaurus/4.1/thesaurus_4.1.0.skos.xml

The PICO Thesaurus has the following features:

• The thesaurus is already in SKOS format. All the concepts are identified with

Persistent URIs (PURL Persistent Identifier system, a short description of these

systems is given in the Guidelines section)

• The thesaurus is organised in 4 concept schemes corresponding to the 4 thematic

questions “who”, “what”, “where” and “when”.

• All the concepts are well documented with scope notes on the use of the labels and

concepts according to the language.

***Figure 6: Preview of the Pico Thesaurus in the SKOSed (Plug-in for Protege) tool\***

***RMCA Thesaurus\***

**Ti****t****le** RMCA Keywords

**Kind of** **re****sou****rce** Thesaurus

**Count****r****y** Belgium

34/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**L****anguag****e****(s)** English, Dutch, French

**D****e****s****cri****pt****i****on**

Thesaurus managed by the Royal Museum for Central Africa (RMCA)

Domain: History and Ethnography

Available in Excel format.

**D****i****m****e****ns****i****on** 11-100

**URL** N/A

The RMCA Keywords thesaurus is an in-house terminology that is not available online. Here

are the main features observed during the conversion:

• The thesaurus has two levels of hierarchy

• The distinction between the different level of hierarchy is done using cell colours

• The thesaurus is perfectly multilingual (each concept is expressed with a label in the

three languages), however some terms are not available in Dutch and the English

version is used instead. A validation process is ongoing in order to define if it is a

coined term, e.g. a term that has been used because the corresponding language was

not available or if the English version is the common use for this concept in that

domain.

**Figure 7: Transformation of the RMCA Keywords Thesaurus**

The figure above shows the RMCA thesaurus in its source format and its converted form.

35/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**4.5.1.** **ATHENA Thesaurus V1**

It is important to keep in mind that the ATHENA Thesaurus in its current version is at a draft

status since it was mainly created for the purpose of testing in the experimental framework.

So at this current stage, this thesaurus does not intend to be a standard.

Considering the properties of each of the selected resources, the elaboration of this first

version of the ATHENA Thesaurus was done in two mapping steps.

The mapping was performed from the most general resource to the most specific. Then a first

mapping between the Michael Subjects thesaurus and the RMCA keywords thesaurus was

done before mapping this version with the PICO thesaurus which is the most specific.

The approach adopted to build this version of the thesaurus consisted in merging the non-

published resources and make mapping links to the published one. We have considered each

of the source terminology as a concept scheme.

In order to provide a thematic organisation of the concepts, and as designed in the PICO

thesaurus, we set four thematic collections, namely “who”, “what”, “where” and “when”.

Here follows a screenshot of the ATHENA Thesaurus:

***Figure 8: Preview of the ATHENA Thesaurus in SKOSed\***

The mapping of these three resources was done manually for the purpose of testing. As our

benchmark on terminology and dedicated tools is still ongoing, tools for automatic or semi-

automatic mapping will be studied.

36/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

In order to use the SKOSed tool, which is a plug-in to Protege (tool dedicated to the

management of OWL ontologies), the URIs have been set in an explicit form. As we

recommend in our guidelines. A next step for the elaboration of this thesaurus will be to

choose a Persistent Identifier System (described in the Guidelines section) and define a

sustainable way to identify the concepts.

37/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**5.** **Guidelines**

The next deliverable (D4.3) will provide guidelines and general recommendations to the

institutions concerning all the steps of the main process described in the section above

(registration, search/navigation, enrichment, collaborative moderation). In this section, based

on the focus of this deliverable, guidelines are provided with regards to SKOSification and

Mapping steps. They are mainly from existing recommendations for managing thesauri, the

major requirements of the SKOS model and our experience (observations and tests) within the

experiment described above.

**5.1.** **Benefits in using SKOS**

RDFS and OWL are the languages that have been formally defined for knowledge

representation. SKOS is one language among this formal languages’ family. The major

difference is that SKOS has been designed in to model every type of controlled vocabulary. It

can be used to represent a thesaurus as well as a classification or a subject headings list. Then

it is a good compromise for the institutions who are using these types of resources, and who

are willing to be compliant with the Semantic Web technologies without developing

sophisticated ontologies.

The SKOS data model is consistent with the formal ontology language OWL. Therefore the

migration from a SKOS version of a terminology towards a formal ontology in OWL can be

handled without major difficulties.

Since the SKOS model is very simple, but still complete enough, the implementation of a

SKOS version has a low cost for migration. As we made the distinction in the introduction,

SKOS is not a formal knowledge representation. But for an institution managing simple list of

terms, or classifications and thesauri in the best case, it would be extremely costly and time

consuming to develop a formal ontology perfectly compliant with Semantic Web technologies

(using OWL for example). Therefore SKOS provides a structure based on classes and

properties which give a powerful data model for migrating and porting these terminologies

towards Semantic Web technologies.

Institutions must keep in mind that the adoption of the SKOS model is not a total replacement

of the data model in use in the institution but a format for publishing and reusing their

terminology and for ensuring the portability of this terminology for a semantic

interoperability. Indeed usually knowledge organization systems (KOS), e.g. controlled

vocabularies and thesauri, are used for indexing, and then porting these KOS into SKOS

would enable the use of these indexing KOS for retrieval as well.

However SKOS may not be the appropriate language for every type of controlled vocabulary.

For instance, authority files which usually provide a list of persons cannot be migrated to a

SKOS version properly since the scope of this type of terminology is real persons and not

concepts. Another point is that the SKOS semantic relations properties cannot really apply to

authority files since a person cannot be related to another one with hierarchical

(narrower/broader) or associative (related) links.

38/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**5.2.** **Guidelines for SKOSification**

By SKOSification, we mean the process of conversion or transformation of a terminology into

SKOS. We list below some guidelines for proceeding to this conversion from a technical and

organisation point of view.

From the technical point of view, many of the guidelines provided here are inherent to the

SKOS model but a special attention must be paid to these points in order to enable the general

consistency within the ATHENA Thesaurus.

**5.2.1.** **Evaluate the main features of the terminology to be migrated**

Before starting any procedure for converting a terminology into SKOS, the institution must

have defined the purpose of its terminology (e.g. indexing and retrieval, only indexing, or

only retrieval).

As a second step, and a consequence of the definition of the purpose, the institution must

evaluate if SKOS is the appropriate format considering the content of its terminology. In the

case of authority files for instance, SKOS may not be the most appropriate format. Here are

some features that can help for this evaluation:

\- Concepts: Is the terminology dealing with objects and abstract things that could be

assimilated to concepts? Is the terminology dealing with persons?

if the terminology is dealing with persons and not objects or abstract things, a

standard like FOAF (Friend Of A Friend)1 would be more apropriate

\- Semantic relations: Are the descriptors (then concepts) of the terminology can be

linked together via semantic relations.

if the terminology only contain independent descriptors without any semantic

relations, a SKOS modelization is not absolutely necessary, an RDF representation

may be more convenient.

\- Interoperability: Can the terminology be linked to another resource dealing with the

same subject/domain or scope?

if the terminology can be linked to other resources, all the potential links should be

considered before the transformation process in order to implement these links in a

most efficient way.

**5.2.2.** **Identify your concepts**

The W3C define two main steps to proceed to the identification of concepts:

\- Creating (or reusing) a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) to uniquely identify the

concept

1 FOAF : http://www.foaf-project.org

39/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

\- Asserting in RDF using the *rdf:type* property that the resource identified by this URI is

of type *skos:Concept*

The publication “Cool URIs for the Semantic Web”1 from the W3C gives some main

guidelines for the definition of the URI’s. Different systems have been elaborated in order to

define Persistent Identifiers which give sustainability for the identification of resources.

Indeed a URI is more than a simple hyperlink, persistent identifiers are supposed to continue

to provide access to the resource, even when it moves to other servers or even to other

organisations.

Several standards have been developed in order to normalise the definition of URIs. We give

below a short description of these main standards2. The ATHENA WP3 will produce a more

detailed document on that subject and the final recommendations expected from the WP4 will

take into account the outcomes of that deliverable.

PURL

URN

NBN

ARK

Open URL

DOI

**PURL**: A PURL (Persistent Uniform Resource Locators) consists of a URL; instead of

pointing directly to the location of a digital object, the PURL points to a resolver, which looks

up the appropriate URL for that resource and returns it to the client as an HTTP redirect,

which then proceeds as normal to retrieve the resource. PURLs are compatible with other

document identification standards such as the URN.

**URN:** The URN (Uniform Resource Name) is designed to describe an *identity* rather than a

*location*; for example, a URN may contain an ISBN (International Standard Book Number,

used as a unique, commercial book identifier).

**NBN:** National Bibliography Numbers (NBNs) is a URN namespace used solely by national

libraries, in order to identify deposited publications which lack an identifier, or to reference

descriptive metadata (cataloguing) that describe the resources. These can be used either for

objects with a digital representation, or for objects that are solely physical, in which case

available bibliographic data is provided instead.

**ARK:** The Archival Resource Key (ARK) is a URL scheme developed at the US National

Library of Medicine and maintained by the California Digital Library. ARKs are designed to

identify objects of any type – both digital and physical objects. The ARK scheme encourages

semantically opaque identifiers for core objects. Unlike an ordinary URL, an ARK is used to

retrieve three things: the object itself, its metadata, and a commitment statement from its

current provider.

1 http://www.w3.org/TR/cooluris/

2 http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue56/tonkin/

40/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Open URL:** An OpenURL contains resource metadata encoded within a URL and is designed

to support mediated linking between information resources and library services. This standard

is not *primarily* designed as a persistent identifier/resolver but is described as a metadata

transport protocol.

**DOI:** The Digital Object Identifier (DOI) is an indirect identifier for electronic documents

based on Handle resolvers. According to the International DOI Foundation (IDF), formed in

October 1997 to be responsible for governance of the DOI System, it is a ‘mechanism for

permanent identification of digital content’.

We can see from these short introductions that some of these standards are more adapted to

specific field (for instance, URN and NBN are more adapted for the libraries), however

standards such as PURL or DOI could be used for definition of URIs.

***Use of a Persistent Identifying System for the definition of the URIs\***

As we described them above, we recommend the use of standards for the identification of the

concepts. Indeed, as the identification of concepts is achieved with the definition of HTTP

URIs, these URI must be declared to persistent identification systems such as PURL which is

normalised. This will also be of a great benefit since it is location-independent, e.g. if the

terminology is moved from one location (housing server) to another, the URIs identifying the

concepts of this terminology will not have to be modified.

***Use of non-explicit URIs\***

It is highly recommended to use non-explicit URIs in order to avoid the reuse of a same URI

for identifying two different concepts. Indeed as natural languages are by definition

ambiguous and polysemous, it is possible that two different concepts might have two similar

labels. The use of explicit URIs supposes that the choice of one specific natural language has

been made during the definition or the migration of the terminology which cannot be

convenient in a multilingual context.

**5.2.3.** **Define with precision the labels expressing concepts**

***Preferred labels must be unique within a concept scheme\***

As it is required by the SKOS data model, no two concepts from a same concept scheme

should have the same preferred label in a given language. However as natural languages are

highly polysemous and full of homographs, the SKOS data model does not forbid that one

concept can have two same preferred labels in two different languages.

***Each concept must be expressed with one preferred label per language\***

***(mandatory)\***

41/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

As we saw above, the SKOS data model does not forbid the absence of preferred label, but

labels are meant to help the understanding and refining the meaning of a concept. This is

especially true in a multilingual context and it is helpful for purposes of administration and

maintenance. Therefore we recommend using one preferred label per language.

It is important to note that this also means that is not possible to have several preferred labels

in the same language.

***Avoid the concatenation of several words for a same label\***

In order to get the most accurate description, we recommend avoiding several values as a

preferred term. For example, double concepts such as “dwelling/houses” must be considered

as two different concepts that are linked by a semantic relation. The use of scope notes can

help to reinforce the closeness of these two concepts.

The link between the two terms must be defined in order to provide the best description. We

can state that “dwelling” and “houses” are synonyms; then the double concepts can be

modelled as follows:

Dwelling: preferred label and houses: alternative label

Another possibility in the case of double concepts is to model the two concepts as related

concepts.

***Privilege the use of the lemma for the preferred label and possibly the other\***

***labels\***

The preferred label should consist in a single word term or a compound words term in natural

language. This means that no artificial word or code must be used to label a concept. Such

code must be defined using the *skos:notation* property.

The lemma of a word represents its canonical form. We strongly recommend this form of

terms to be used as preferred label. For instance, in English or in French, the usual form of a

lemma in the case of nouns is the singular for the number and the masculine for the gender.

For verbal forms, infinitive forms will be privileged. Thus the forms of terms should be based

on the conventions in the languages involved.

If the concept is only expressed with labels in specific forms that do not correspond to the

lemma, this must be documented via the documentation properties (*skos:note*,

*skos:changeNote*, *skos:editorialNote* or *skos:historyNote*)

In the case of compound terms, if possible, the addition of adjectives or verbs to a noun

phrase should be limited.

In the same spirit, the use of articles and prepositions should be avoided in order not to extend

the length of the label. From the computing systems point of view, these guidelines can help

the efficiency of a retrieval system.

42/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

***Privilege the typography in use by convention in the languages involved\***

The labels should respect the typographical rules that are usually in use in the languages of

the labels. For instance, in English all the words referring to a language or nationality starts

with an upper-case character whereas in French, these words will be in lower case characters.

Thus we recommend respecting the conventions that are in use for each language involved.

Any exception to this guideline must be documented via documentation properties of the

model.

**5.2.4.** **Avoid the duplication of information**

The SKOS data model consists of classes and properties as we saw above. Meanings are to be

deduced by an efficient use of these properties. As some of the properties available in the

SKOS model are proposed as pairs (inverse or symmetric), this supposes that the use of one

property implies the opposite or the reverse. Therefore it is better to avoid duplication and not

to repeat the same information in different ways. SKOS terminologies are processed by

machines. So the less redundant information there is, the faster the results of a query can be

retrieved.

The main properties to pay attention to in order to avoid duplication of information are:

***Inverse properties:\***

The use of the *skos:broader* or *skos:narrower* property implies the inverse meaning.

Asserting that A has a broader concept B implies that B has a narrower concept A.

This is true also for the *skos:broaderTransitive* and *skos:narrowerTransitive* property.

***Symmetric properties:\***

The *skos:related* property is symmetric then if an assertion that A is related to B is made,

there is no need to make the following assertion, B is related to A.

However there is a possibility to use an extension to the SKOS data model in order to remove

the symmetry of a property if this creates confusion in the meaning of the concepts.

**5.2.5.** **Provide precision to the semantic relations of your concepts**

***Non-immediate hierarchical relations\***

In some cases, semantic relations between concepts have to be described with precision in

order to avoid a loss of meaning or information and also avoid designing information which

will not make any sense. For example the *skos:broaderTransitive*/*skos:narrowerTransitive*

pair of properties allows to describe with precision relations between concepts when two

levels of hierarchy are impacted.

Then the use of these transitive properties is preferred in order to assert a non-immediate

hierarchical relationship between two concepts.

43/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

***Consistency of the semantic relations\***

In order to ensure consistency, mixing hierarchical relationships with associative ones should

be avoided. For example, a concept A cannot be related to another concept B if this concept A

is the narrower concept of a concept C. Therefore a special attention must be paid when

designing the semantic relations between concepts.

**5.2.6.** **Enable the multilingualism**

***Provide for each concept an equivalent label in the languages involved in your\***

***terminology\***

Special attention must be paid to the multilingual labels expressing the concepts. These

multilingual labels must be defined in the correct way in the different languages of the

terminology so that the equivalencies can be computed from the SKOS representation of

concepts.

***Use the same system of language tags for defining the language of label\***

There are several systems which are normalized and equivalent: for example the three tags

“en”, “en-GB” or “en-Latn” are different language tag systems referring to one language

which is the English from Great Britain in Latin alphabet. In the case of terminology where

different languages of different alphabet are involved, the tag system “language-alphabet” (for

example “en-Latn”) may be useful for providing more precision. We recommend using the

same system of tags for every language attribute of the terminology.

In the case where a specific language tags system is not required, we recommend the use of

the language systems defined in ISO 639-11where the language tags are coded on two letters

in lower case.

**5.2.7.** **Ensure the documentation of concepts and the terminology**

***Provide documentation for each change that may occur to a concept and its\***

***labels\***

The SKOS data model provides number of documentation properties in order to refine the

meaning of a concept or keep track of the changes on the label(s) of a concept and/or its

meaning. For the purposes of administration and maintenance of the terminology, each

change must be reported in the SKOSified terminology using change notes (*skos:changeNote*)

or editorial notes (*skos:editorialNote*)

1 http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/php/code_list.php; see the ISO 639-1 column.

44/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

***Provide as much as possible documentation to concepts with scope notes\***

As mentioned above, documentation on concepts helps to refine the meaning of a concept.

The use of scope notes (*skos:scopeNote*) can be very helpful in enabling a better

understanding of the concepts with contextual information. Examples may also be provided

via *skos:example* property.

Documentation of concepts is especially needed in the case of homographs/homonyms in the

same language or different languages for the labels expressing the concept. Then scope notes

and examples can provide the user with a semantic disambiguation.

**5.3.** **Mapping**

Mapping is an inherent part of the SKOSification of a terminology. The following guidelines

emphasize some aspects of the mapping process that may be crucial for general consistency of

the terminology and the meanings of concepts.

**5.3.1.** **Pay attention to the identification of your concepts during the**

**mapping process**

***Use only absolute URIs\***

This guideline follows on from the one referring to the identification of concepts in the

SKOSifcation part above. The terminology is made available in a machine-readable format by

the SKOSification process. In order to make easily computable the identification of concepts

and linking between concepts, it is recommended to use absolute URIs rather than relative

ones.

For example:

<rdf:Description

rdf:about="**http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/AthenaThesaurus/RMCA**

**_Keywords#architecture**"> is an absolute HTTP URI

<rdf:Description rdf:about="**RMCA_Keywords#architecture**"> is a relative HTTP URI.

***Respect the URIs of the original sources\***

As URIs are defined in order to identify the concepts uniquely, during the mapping process

from a concept scheme to another, the URI defined within each concept scheme must be

respected in order to enable the interoperability between the different resources involved.

45/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**5.3.2.** **Avoid the duplication of information**

We saw that the structural properties for defining the semantic relations between concepts are

either inverse or symmetric. This is also true for the mapping properties.

***Inverse properties\***

The mapping properties *skos:broadMatch* and *skos:narrowMatch* are each other’s inverse

therefore there is no need to repeat twice the same mapping link using both properties for the

same subject and object.

***Symmetric properties\***

The mapping property *skos:exactMatch* and *skos:closeMatch* are symmetric.So repeating the

mapping link can be avoided.

The property *skos:exactMatch* is also a transitive property then there is no need to repeat the

mapping link on several levels.

For instance:

A *skos:exactMatch* B

B *skos: exactMatch* C

The assertion A skos:exactMatch C can be inferred from the preceding statement.

**5.3.3.** **Provide precision to the semantic relations of your concepts**

***Use the appropriate properties to make links between concepts\***

The SKOS data model provides semantic relations and mapping properties, and does not

restrict the use of these properties. However we strongly recommend to model in a

homogenous way the relations between concepts in order to ensure the semantic consistency

of the terminology.

We recommend to:

o Use mapping properties to make a link between concepts from different concept

schemes

o Use semantic relations properties to make a link between concepts within a same

concept scheme

The SKOS data model does not forbid using semantic relations properties for make a link

between concepts from different concept schemes but it is highly recommended to follow

these guidelines.

46/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**5.3.4.** **Enable the multilingualism**

***Manage multilingualism of the terminology through mapping of concepts and\***

***terms\***

The mapping process can be useful in a monolingual context but is especially relevant in a

multilingual context. Equivalences can be stated from the mapping links made between

several terminologies in different languages.

Equivalencies in a multilingual context can be of three kinds: semantic, cultural or structural.

The semantic aspect refers to the meaning of the concept; the cultural aspect refers to the use

of a term in a given language or culture; and the structural aspect refers to the semantic

relations between concepts. This last aspect deals with the mapping and allows defining

complete equivalence (synonymy) or partial equivalence (quasi synonymy) or non-

equivalence.

As it was the case for the first version of the ATHENA Thesaurus, equivalences between

concepts in languages that were not initially involved in the source terminology can be

deduced from correct mapping links without translating the concepts.

**5.3.5.** **Ensure the documentation of concepts and the terminology**

***Make explicit with notes the purpose of a relation\***

For the purposes of maintenance and administration, it is important to explain the choices of

modelling that have been made for making links between concepts. The use of scope notes

can help making explicit these choices.

Documentation properties can also keep track of history of mapping links.

Validation is an important part of the SKOSification process and mapping also. Therefore a

special attention must be paid to this final step of the SKOSification.

From a technical point of view, in order to check the consistency of your converted

terminology to the SKOS model, we recommend using the online web service Pool Party1

.

Pool Party offers a free online tool for validating SKOS files that may be already online or

stored on your local repositories.

This tool checks the consistency of the SKOSified terminology according to the following

points which refer to our guidelines:

\- Valid URIs: the tool checks if there is not any unauthorised character in the URI.

Although if an URI is used twice for identifying two different concepts, there won’t be

any alert or warning.

\- Missing language tags: the tool checks if all the labels and notes have a language tag

\- Missing labels: the tool checks that each concept has at least one preferred label.

\- Loose concepts: all the concepts that are isolated and not linked to other concepts are

pointed out as loose concepts

1 http://demo.semantic-web.at:8080/SkosServices/check

47/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

\- Disjoint OWL classes: the tool checks the eventual consistency with OWL elements that

may be in the SKOSified terminology

\- Consistent use of labels: the rules for the use of labels are checked by the tool in order to

avoid the use of a same label as a preferred label and alternative or hidden label, and to

avoid the use of two preferred labels in a same language, ...

\- Consistent usage of mapping properties: the tool checks the consistency in the mapping

relations.

\- Consistent usage f semantic relations: the tool checks that there is no mix between

hierarchical and associative semantic relationships.

An example of output from this tool is presented in the Annexes.

From the content point of view, only the administrators and users of the terminology can

validate the final migration of the terminology into SKOS format at least for an initial

transformation process since they will be the one able to confirm or modify the general design

of the terminology and its semantic relations according to the indexing and retrieval

efficiency. For further modifications and updates, a set of rules and policies have to be

defined in order to enable the collaborative moderation for managing the terminology. These

rules and policies have to be agreed on by the community of users.

48/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**6.** **Conclusions**

**6.1.** **What would be an ideal tool?**

This conclusion about an ideal tool comes from the needs and issues raised through the activity

done in the Work package 4 of the ATHENA project. The work done in the WP4 framework is

more and more making explicit unsatisfied needs for European museums and cultural institutions

more generally in terms of terminology management and harmonisation of the existing

terminology resources. For the time being, provision of content from European museums to

Europeana is facilitated through ATHENA though the technical diversity and the multilinguality

of their terminology make difficult their compliancy with Europeana requirements. There is a gap

between the actual situation of terminology management in museums, and the skills and means

necessary to have for an effective ingestion into the portal. Thus we look for one possible answer

to reduce such a gap.

**The needs:**

When an institution intends to ingest into Europeana its digital collection and object descriptions,

an effort about the terminology in use for these descriptions has to be done. Indeed, there is a set

of criteria to respect in order to be compliant (SKOS format, multilinguality). This task of

terminology management internally requires an expertise and tools that are not available in the

institutions most of time. For instance, in ATHENA WP4, D4.1 study (Identification of

terminology resources in European museums) has confirmed that a lot of European museums use

an in-house non-standard terminology to describe their collections and objects. The cost implied

by a reference terminology or specific needs (language, domain, …) are the main reasons for this

choice. This means that these museums have a strong effort to make for expressing their

descriptions with a reference terminology fitting with Europeana. Particular skills in knowledge

management and/or information engineering are necessary to have internally. Tools have to be

identified, possibly acquired, and tested together to make sure that they are interoperable. Such an

effort is very costly and time consuming for the museums.

**Context assumptions:**

We assume that:

• The European Commission cannot take in charge all the institution costs of terminology

management for the compliancy with Europeana (this means that institutions will have to

support such a cost we should try to reduce the more we can)

• The Web 2.0 approach and practice can provide new opportunities for terminology

management at an institutional level and can make easier cooperation with the European level.

**One possible answer:**

The answer we propose consists of the design and the implementation of an integrated software

environment for terminology management enabling any institution to find its way to manage its

terminology according to Europeana ingestion.

A study of the information process (see the Annexes) concerning terminology management has

already led us to consider an integrated software environment able to support a 6-step-chain of

tasks:

49/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

1. Registration of a terminology in a repository
2. SKOSification of a terminology
3. Search and navigation into a network of vocabularies
4. Mapping of the terminology with a thesaurus
5. Enrichment of a thesaurus
6. Collaborative moderation of updates/modifications of the thesaurus

In our understanding, we consider that an ideal tool for terminology management would have

as features:

• To be a **webservice**: For collaborative work online through Internet (e.g.: Athena

Ingester service)

• To have a **user-friendly GUI**: Adapted for a non-expert use in European museums

(e.g. Cyclops for graphical mapping)

• To combine **open-source** components: Such a service must stay independent of

proprietary codes and formats (e.g: xTree)

• To be logically structured with an **intuitive Workflow**: The user must find which

actions to do according to his/her needs(e.g.: WP4 6 steps process)

• To be **flexible** enough to be adapted to new standards: What if SKOS is updated in a

new version or evolving towards an ontology description?

**6.2.** **Perspective**

After having provided a survey on the terminologies used in European museums (D4.1) and

guidelines for SKOSification and mapping (D4.2), we are now going to deliver by the end of

the project the final recommendations about terminology management (D4.3). In a certain

sense, that coming deliverable can be considered as a specification report for the

implementation of the ideal tool we mentioned above.

We can also guess that such an effort to specify the ideal tool may complement other

initiatives or projects. For example we can mention a new project **Linked Heritage** (under

negotiation), which addresses the coordination of Standards and Technologies for the

enrichment of Europeana. Actually a WP dedicated to terminology management and

multilingualism is foreseen in the project. The WP aims to take advantage of ATHENA WG4

activity, and to implement a prototype of an integrated software platform for terminology

management. The WP will also benefit from the work done on the ATHENA Thesaurus in

order to continue its completion and extend it to the other domains as Linked Heritage is a

cross-domain project.

Moreover, as our benchmark helped us to identify relevant tools and structures in regards with

terminology management, possible solutions and developments are to be investigated in order

to adapt the ATHENA Ingester for terminology mapping or integrating components of the

xTree tool. In both cases, collaboration with partners of the Linked Heritage project will be

reinforced in order to propose a sustainable solution.

50/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**7.** **Annexes**

**7.1.** **Acronyms**

ARK: Archival Resource Key

DOI: Digital Object Identifier

HTML: Hypertext Markup Language

HTTP: Hypertext Transfer Protocol

LIDO: Lightweight Information Describing Objects

NBN: National Bibliography Numbers

OWL: Web Ontology Language

PURL: Persistent Uniform Resource Locators

RDF: Resource Description Framework

RDFS: RDF Schema

SKOS: Simple Knowledge Organisation System

SPARQL: SPARQL Protocol And RDF Query Languages

URI: Uniform Resource Identifier

URN: Uniform Resource Name

W3C: World Wide Web Consortium

XML: Extensible Markup Language

**7.2.** **Process and issues**

Here follows the content of a document we finalised 2nd November 2009 and that were

presented during the technical meeting in Budapest the 13th of November 2009.

51/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

Athena WP4 Terminology process

**Purpose**

Here is the description of the logical processes concerning terminology within the project

Athena. This document is a draft and its content shall both help write the WP4 deliverables

and drive the experiment we are planning. So: For discussion.

**Introduction**

Here are a few remarks necessary to keep in mind by reading this document.

**Museums**

Among all the possible content providers we focus on the European museums:

• Which have descriptions of the objects composing their digital collections,

• Which have used a terminology to express these descriptions,

• Which have made available or intend to make available their repository for a

harvesting by Athena, hence by Europeana.

**Use cases**

For such an institution, we have listed different scenarios that we can distribute into 2 major

categories. The first main category takes into account 3 cases where the processes are fully

achieved through Athena and Europeana without any update of the Athena Thesaurus. The

second main category deals with 3 other cases where an evolution (modification/update) of

the Athena thesaurus has to be achieved.

No update cases:

1. The institution has used a standard fitting with Europeana for describing its collections
2. The institution has used the Athena Thesaurus without modification for describing its

collections

3. The institution has used another terminology which is already registered into the

Athena Platform and mapped with the Athena Thesaurus, and does not aim to update

anything

Necessary update cases:

4. The institution has used another terminology which is already registered into the

Athena Platform and mapped with the Athena Thesaurus, and just aims to update its

mapping

5. The institution has used another terminology which is already registered into the

Athena Platform but which is not mapped with the Athena Thesaurus yet, and aims to

do this mapping

52/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

6. The institution has used another terminology which is not already registered into the

Athena Platform, and aims to register it and map it with the Athena Thesaurus

53/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Athena Thesaurus**

We call Athena Thesaurus the thesaurus produced and updated by all contributors during and

after the project. As a thesaurus, the Athena Thesaurus is a network of controlled

vocabularies, that is, an amount of terms organised by domains of description and structured

thanks to bridges in-between.

This Athena Thesaurus is:

• SKOSified: The Athena Thesaurus is already SKOSified; it fits with Europeana

requirements; so it can be directly used for description by institutions in case

• Free of rights: Any institution can use it as it likes without paying any fee; hence an

institution which enrich the Athena Thesaurus by terms coming from its own

terminology must check if it has rights to do so for free distribution and modification

• Evolving: We are considering to enable a collaborative workflow to produce and

update the Athena Thesaurus; a specific interface with moderation process can be

imagined

• Available online: We can imagine a Web service helping an institution to use the

Athena Thesaurus online for description; of course this terminology will be

downloadable for a use offline

• Mappable: We consider to enable the mapping through a Web service of terminologies

with the Athena Thesaurus; to do so, there are a few requirements: 1/ the terminology

must be syntactically and semantically valid; 2/ it must be well-SKOSified. While

these requirements are not satisfied, the mapping would not be possible.

**Principles**

**Updating**

In a nutshell, hereafter we have represented the processes of these use cases according to the

principle of updating. In this way the question we tried to answer step-by-step was: Is there

someone aiming to create or modify something? Then we identified the possible “who” of

each action among: the institution, the Athena platform, the Europeana platform. This must

absolutely be discussed and validated, especially by the WP7 leader.

Any updating of the Athena Thesaurus is motivated by a change of the mapping between its

elements. In certain case, this change is due to a new terminology that some institution has

mapped with the Athena Thesaurus. And the mapping of a new terminology requires the

validation of its form: the terminology must be well-SKOSified.

54/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Processes**

**No update cases**

**Use case 1**

**The institution has used a standard fitting with Europeana for describing its collections**

This is the simplest case in the

sense that it does not require any

specific action from the Athena

terminology scope. Indeed the

institution has used a standard

already compliant with Europeana

requirements to describe the

objects of its collections.

55/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Use case 2**

**The institution has used the Athena Thesaurus without modification for describing its**

**collections**

This case is also very simple, like

a particular case of the previous

one. Here the institution has used

the Athena Thesaurus to describe

the objects of its collections. Now,

as far as the Athena Thesaurus is

used without modification in-

house, it is compliant with

Europeana requirements. This is

one guarantee that Athena can

provide.

56/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Use case 3**

**The institution has used another terminology which is already registered into the**

**Athena Platform and mapped with the Athena Thesaurus, and does not aim to update**

**anything**

Here is the last simple case we

have identified. The institution

has used another terminology to

describe the objects of its

collections rather than the

compliant standards nor the

Athena thesaurus.

But it has already registered it

into the Athena Platform and

mapped it with the Athena

Thesaurus. So all the

descriptions expressed with this

terminology are exploitable by

Europeana for access and

retrieval. This is due to the

mapping with the Athena

Thesaurus.

Since no update is foreseen,

harvesting is in order as before.

57/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Necessary update cases**

**Use case 4**

**The institution has used another terminology which is already registered into the**

**Athena Platform and mapped with the Athena Thesaurus, and just aims to update its**

**mapping**

Here is the first case of updating of the

Athena Thesaurus. The institution has

used another terminology to describe the

objects of its collections rather than the

compliant standards or the Athena

thesaurus. It has already registered it

into the Athena Platform and mapped it

with the Athena Thesaurus.

But the institution needs to refine the

existing mapping. So the Athena

Platform must check if the new mapping

is correct. If yes, the Athena Platform

submits the update of the Athena

Thesaurus to Europeana, and harvesting

keeps possible as before. If no, the

institution must refine again and again

its mapping until the platform validates

the result. In case of cancellation, the

last valid mapping version is still

applied.

58/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Use case 5**

**The institution has used another terminology which is already registered into the**

**Athena Platform but which is not mapped with the Athena Thesaurus yet, and aims to**

**do this mapping**

Here is the case of updating of the

Athena Thesaurus in which a first

mapping has to be made between with

the institution terminology.

The institution has used another

terminology to describe the objects of

its collections rather than the

compliant standards or the Athena

thesaurus. It has already registered it

into the Athena Platform, however it

did not map it with the Athena

Thesaurus yet.

To do so, the institution is invited to look at the existing terms of the Athena Thesaurus to

find equivalent ones to its own terminology terms. Thanks to a domain organisation of the

Athena Thesaurus and a graphical display of all its controlled vocabularies, the research

would be more effective. If it finds relevant terms, the institution maps its terminology terms

with those, then the Athena platform controls if the mapping is correct like it was a simple

updating. If the institution does not find relevant terms, it can propose its own ones to enrich

the Athena Thesaurus. Once again a validation process (with moderation) is necessary. The

following of the process is like within the previous case.

59/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Use case 6**

**The institution has used another terminology which is not already registered into the**

**Athena Platform, and aims to register it and map it with the Athena Thesaurus**

Here is the final case of updating of

the Athena Thesaurus in which a

complete process of registration and

mapping is necessary.

The institution has used another

terminology to describe the objects of

its collections rather than the

compliant standards or the Athena

thesaurus. It has not already

registered it into the Athena Platform.

The registration is mandatory before

any mapping with the Athena

Thesaurus. This is a 2-step process.

First the Athena Platform checks if

the terminology is semantically and

syntactically valid (it means: if the

file can be interpreted). Then it

checks if the terminology is well-

SKOSified.

If these two requirements are not

satisfied, the Web service of the

Athena platform does not allow the

mapping.

If they are satisfied, the institution

can map its terminology with the

Athena Thesaurus as presented in the

previous case.

60/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**Issues**

Thanks to this process representation, we have listed for the time being 4 issues to discuss

with Athena partners:

• **Workflow**: We are planning to deliver finally a workflow specification of

collaborative production of the Athena Thesaurus; the moderation process appears as

the tricky point of such a workflow;

• **Versioning**: We keep in mind that such a service must ensure at every moment that all

previous versions of the Athena Thesaurus are still working for harvesting. Each

update (modification/deletion/addition) should be detailed and archived.

• **Platform(s)**: We wonder how to technically support SKOSification and mapping

tasks: is it in the perimeter of the Athena platform? Shall we expect that Europeana

will provide similar Web services (and hardware) we could duplicate? ( To discuss

especially with WP7 and EuropeanaConnect or v1.0)

• **IPR**: We consider to let the Athena Thesaurus free of rights for use and (controlled)

modification; a Creative Commons “By:” license might be useful To discuss

especially with WP6

• **Sustainability:** What Athena and/or Europeana can ensure as a service after the

project? What if we propose at the end of the project an Athena Thesaurus Web

service for the online use of the Athena Thesaurus for description of collections?

61/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**7.3.** **Benchmark: Tools**

All the tools and initiatives we have considered are listed in the table below:

**Figure 9*****: table of all the tools and initiatives considered in our benchmark. The picture is a screen\***

***shot of the one available on the wiki\***

***at:\******http://www.athenaeurope.org/athenawiki/index.php/Benchmark#Tools\***

Among all these tools we have particularly focus on the ones that have briefly presented

below.

**7.3.1.** **ThManager**

**Introduction**

**Name ThManager**

Main function Edition and visualization

Administrative Information

(Public/private, country, language)

Public (University of Zaragoza -

GeoSpatiumLabS.L., Spain), English and Spanish

Type (tool, web service) Standalone software

Command-line, GUI GUI

OS Multi-platform (Windows, Mac, Unix)

Skills and requirements Installation of Java (JVM)

62/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

Remarks Metadata on thesauri are managed in a separate file

(DC)

**Benchmark outcome**

• **Registration**: table of thesauri, then not a real navigation tree for the open thesaurus

• **Search / Navigation**: search engine inside one terminology

• **Enrichment**: Edition mode

**7.3.2.** **SKOSed (Protégé)**

**Introduction**

**Name SKOSed (Plug-in Protégé)**

Main function Ontology production

Administrative Information

Public (Stanford University), USA, English

(Public/private, country, language)

Type (tool, web service) Standalone software

Command-line, GUI GUI

OS Windows, Mac OS

Skills and requirements Information engineering, grasp of Protégé

Remarks No real SKOSification, starting from scratch; OWL

compatibility, good for Semantic Web

**Benchmark outcome**

• **Registration**: Connection with online repository, local file system

• **SKOSification**: From scratch only, not user-friendly

• **Search / Navigation**: search engine inside one terminology, or navigation into a list of

ontologies

• **Enrichment**: Edition mode

63/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**7.3.3.** **AnnoCultor**

**Introduction**

**Name AnnoCultor**

Main function Conversion (XML to RDF)

Administrative Information

(Public/private, country, language)

Public (Multimediane-Culture Project; Europeana

Project), English

Type (tool, web service) Set of tools

Command-line, GUI Command-line

OS Multi-Platform (Windows, Unix, Mac)

Skills and requirements Installation of Java (JDK) and Apache Maven

(software project management tool);

Technical skills (XML, XSL and Java)

Remarks Finished Project; conversion of collections and

thesauri

**Benchmark outcome**

• **SKOSification**: Command-line

**7.3.4.** **xTree**

**Introduction**

**Name xTree**

Main function Production, edition and visualization

Administrative Information

Public (Digicult Project, University of Kiel); German

(Public/private, country, language)

Type (tool, web service) Web service

Command-line, GUI GUI

OS Multiplatform (Windows, Mac OS, Linux)

Skills and requirements Knowledge*a priori* of the terms to map

64/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

Remarks Built on Open Source software, no flexible graphical

mapping

**Benchmark outcome**

• **Registration**: Connection with online repository, local file system

• **Search / Navigation**: tree, search engine inside one terminology, or navigation into a

list of ontologies

• **Mapping**: on a same page with SKOS relations, but without any intuitive graphical

interface

• **Enrichment**: Edition mode

• **Collaborative Moderation**: Forum

65/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**7.4.** **Pool Party SKOS validator**

Here is the output of the SKOS validator of Pool Party

66/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**7.5.** **Schematic view of the MICHAEL Subject list for Architecture**

**domain**

**7.6.** **Schematic view of the RMCA Thesaurus for Architecture domain**

67/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**7.7.** **Schematic view of the PICO Thesaurus for Architecture domain**

68/69Guidelines for mapping into SKOS, dealing with

translations

**7.8.** **Schematic view of the ATHENA Thesaurus**

69/69